BHAGAVAD GITA - THE SONG OF THE LORD

Chapter 1: Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kurukshetra

1.1 Dhritarashtra said: O Sanjaya, after assembling in the place of pilgrimage at Kurukshetra, what did my people and the Pandavas do, being desirous to fight?

1.2 Sanjaya said: O King, after looking over the army arranged in military formation by the sons of Pandu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and spoke the following words.

1.3 O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly arranged by your intelligent disciple the son of Drupada.

1.4 Here in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhima and Arjuna: great fighters like Yuyudhana, Virata, and Drupada.

1.5 There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters here like Dhrishtaketu, Cekitana, Kasiraja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja, and Shaibya.

1.6 There are the mighty Yudhamanyu, the very powerful Uttamaujas, the son of Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi. All these warriors are great chariot fighters.

1.7 But for your information, O best of the brahmins, let me tell you about the captains who are worthy of special mention. I am opining them for you.

1.8 There are myself, Bhima, Arjuna, Satyaki, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, and Jayadratha, who are all very great chariot warriors.

1.9 There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives for my sake. All are well equipped with different kinds of weapons, and all are experienced in military science.

1.10 Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather Bhishma, whereas the strength of the Pandavas, carefully protected by Bhima, is limited.

1.11 Now all of you should firmly guard Bhishma, as you stand at your respective strategic points on this battlefield.

Chapter 2: Contents of the Gita Summarized

2.1 Sanjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion, his mind depressed, his eyes full of tears, Madhusudana, Lord Krishna, spoke these words.

2.2 The Blessed Lord said: Arjuna, how have these impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knows the principles of life. They do not lead to higher planets, but to infamy.

2.3 O son of Pritha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become you. Shake off this petty weakness of your heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy!

2.4 Arjuna said: O killer of Madhu, O killer of the demon Kaitabha, how can I counterattack with arrows in battle men like Bhishma and Drona, who are worthy of my worship?

2.5 It would be better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they are avaricious, they are nonetheless my masters.

2.6 Nor do I know how to settle this enmity, nor will it lead to a happy solution. Whether we conquer them or they conquer us, only death will welcome us after we kill Bhishma and Drona, the friends of our father.

2.7 Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of miserly weakness. In this condition I am asking You: which is the better path? Please tell me decisively. I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.

2.8 I can find no means to drive away this sorrow which is drying up my senses. I will not be able to destroy it even if I win an unrivaled kingdom on the earth with sovereignty over the demigods, or even if I gain supreme dominion.

2.9 Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of the enemy, told Krishna, "Govinda, I shall not fight," and fell silent.

2.10 O descendant of Bharata, at that time Madhusudana, smiling, spoke to the grief-stricken Arjuna within the midst of the two armies.

2.11 The Supreme Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not worthy of grief. Those truly wise mourn neither for the living nor the dead.

2.12 Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.

2.13 As the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at the time of death. A self-realized person is not bewildered by such a change.

2.14 O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of heat and cold, happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one should try to tolerate them without being disturbed.

2.15 O best among men, the person who is not disturbed by happiness and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.

2.16 Those philosophers who are advanced in knowledge say that one is not truly established in knowledge so long as he identifies himself with the gross body, with its senses, mind and intelligence. Only one who knows himself to be transcendental to the body is in actual knowledge.

2.17 That which pervades the entire body you should know to be indestructible. No one is capable of destroying that imperishable soul.

2.18 All these bodies are said to be perishable; the soul within them is eternal, immeasurable, and indestructible. Therefore, fight, O descendant of Bharata.

2.19 He who thinks that the living entity is slain and he who thinks that the living entity slays, both are under the same misunderstanding. The living entity can neither be killed nor kill anyone.

2.20 As a person sheds worn-out garments and wears new ones, likewise, at the time of death the soul casts off his worn-out body and attains a new one.

2.21 The wealth, resources, workers, and personal capacity of a person cannot be destroyed by any external or internal violence. The self cannot be harmed by any weapon, burned by any fire, moistened by any water, or withered by any wind.

2.22 This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned nor dried. He is eternal, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable, and forever the same.

2.23 It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, and immutable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.

2.24 If, however, you think that the soul is perpetually born and dies, still you have no reason to lament, for death is certain for one who has been born, and birth is certain for one who has died. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you should not waver.

2.25 All created beings are unmanifest in their origin, manifest in their interim state, and unmanifest again when annihilated. So what need is there for lamentation?

2.26 Some look on the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and some hear of him as amazing, while others, even after hearing about him, cannot understand him at all.

2.27 O descendant of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, similarly, the living entity, one within the body, illuminates the entire body by consciousness.

2.28 Those situated in knowledge of the difference between the body and the soul, and understanding the process of liberation from bondage, engage themselves in the pursuits of transcendence. That supreme abode is called the Brahman, and it is the ultimate destination. When one understands that everything material will be vanquished and only the Brahman remains eternally, one attains liberation.

2.29 A person is said to have achieved his dharma when he engages in work for which he is qualified by his nature and which he performs as an offering in devotion to the Lord.

2.30 It is far better to engage in one's own occupation, however imperfectly performed, than to accept another's occupation and perform it well. Prescribed duties performed as an offering to the Lord are free from sinful reactions.

2.31 One should never abandon duties out of fear or attachment. He who acts in accordance with his nature and capacities, performing the duties assigned to him, will achieve perfection.

Chapter 3: Karma Yoga

3.1 Arjuna said: O Janardana, it is very difficult to tolerate the instruction that one should engage in battle. Perhaps it would be better to accept the renounced order of life and escape this turmoil.

3.2 If you think that knowledge is superior to action, why then do you engage me in this horrible war, O Krishna?

3.3 O Madhusudana, O master of the senses, please defeat my resolute determination with clear instruction. Tell me what is best for me. I am your disciple. Please instruct me in what I should do.

3.4 The Supreme Lord said: O sinless Arjuna, I have already explained that there are two classes of men who realize this truth: those situated in knowledge of oneness and those situated in devotional service. But now listen as I tell you of another path, the path of action, by following which everyone can reach perfection.

3.5 By not engaging in the acts of sense gratification, a man cannot achieve freedom from reaction, nor by merely renouncing prescribed duties can he attain the highest perfection. One must engage in the prescribed duty and at the same time accept Lord as supreme beneficiary.

3.6 One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a pretender.

3.7 On the other hand, if a sincere person tries to control the active senses by the mind and begins Karma Yoga without attachment, he is by far superior.

3.8 Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man cannot even maintain his physical body without work.

3.9 Work done as a sacrifice for Vishnu has to be performed, otherwise work binds one to the material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti, perform your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain unattached and free from bondage.

3.10 In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth generations of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Vishnu, and blessed them by saying, Be happy by this yajna and let it cause the bestowing of all desirable things.

3.11 The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you, and thus regulated by the Pancha-yajna, you will certainly become free from all sins and from the reaction of impious action.

3.12 The demigods are satisfied by the performance of yajna, and they bestow upon us all desirable necessities of life. One who enjoys these gifts without offering them to the Demigods is indeed a thief.

3.13 The righteous who eat food after performing sacrifices are freed from all kinds of sin, but the wicked who prepare food for personal sense gratification certainly eat only sin.

3.14 All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajna [sacrifice], and yajna is born from prescribed duties.

3.15 Prescribed duties are described in the Vedas, and the Vedas are manifested from the Supreme Brahman. Consequently the all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated in acts of sacrifice.

3.16 O Partha, one who does not follow this prescribed Vedic system certainly leads a sinful life in the mode of passion and lust. Therefore, he lives in vain.

3.17 But for one who takes pleasure in the Self, whose human life is one of self-realization, and who is satisfied in the Self only, fully satiated, for him there is no duty.

3.18 A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor, in performing virtuous action, does he depend on any other living being.

3.19 Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act as a matter of duty, for by working without attachment one attains the Supreme.

3.20 Kings such as Janaka attained perfection solely by performance of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for the sake of educating the people in general, you should perform your prescribed duty.

3.21 Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary conduct, all the world pursues.

3.22 O son of Pritha, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I a need to obtain anything, and yet I am engaged in prescribed duties.

3.23 For if I ever failed to engage in carefully performing prescribed duties, all men would follow My path.

3.24 If I did not perform prescribed duties, all these worlds would be put to ruination. I would be the cause of creating unwanted population, and I would thereby destroy the peace of all sentient beings.

3.25 As the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results, the learned perform their duties without attachment to the results for the sake of leading people toward the right path.

3.26 So as not to disrupt the minds of ignorant men attached to the fruitive results of prescribed duties, a learned person should not induce them to stop work, but he should engage them in work in the spirit of devotion.

3.27 All actions are performed by the modes of material nature. Bewildered by false ego, the embodied living entity thinks himself to be the doer.

3.28 O mighty-armed Arjuna, a person free from false ego whose intelligence is not entangled, though engaged in killing, is not the killer, nor is he affected or bound by the action.

3.29 Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the three factors which motivate action; the senses, the work, and the performer are three constituents of action.

3.30 According to the three modes of material nature and the work associated with them, the four divisions of human society are created by Me. And although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am yet the non-doer, being unchangeable.

3.31 Creatures are not bound by Me; they are bound by their own karma. I am not situated in the material world, just as the ether, though all-pervading, is not bound by air.

3.32 As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I also control all entities. Everything is under My control, just as the planets and stars obey the laws of gravity.

3.33 O son of Pritha, one who is not connected with the Divine Nature does not attain to this abode, the eternal, immortal state. All other creatures are subject to rebirth.

3.34 I am controlled by love and not by ambition. Everything revolves around Me. I am both the material and the efficient cause of this manifestation. All living beings are created by Me, but they are not in Me in the same way that threads are in a cloth.

3.35 The best charity is that given when one is confident that by it one is giving to the right person at the right time and in circumstances where one can do without. And charity is pure when it is given out of duty, without returns, in a proper place and time, and to a worthy person.

3.36 Righteousness performed without desire for return, performed as a duty, without love and without hate, is said to be in the mode of goodness.

3.37 The scriptures declare that one who, resorting to any means, takes the life of any creature for the sustenance of his body, has to live up the results of such sinful action in future births.

3.38 O Arjuna, the path of duty is to be followed. This is the path traversed by all great souls. You should not deviate from it.

3.39 O mighty armed one, by this knowledge you may understand that all living beings, without exception, are under My control; and by knowing this you can become free from all anxieties by surrendering unto Me.

4.1 The Supreme Lord Said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Ikshvaku. This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in this way. But in course of time the succession was broken, and therefore this science as it is appears to be lost.

4.2 That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend, and can therefore understand the transcendental mystery of this science.

4.3 Arjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvan is senior by birth to You. How am I to understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?

4.4 The Supreme Lord said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I can remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!

4.5 Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every millennium in My original transcendental form.

4.6 Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion, at that time, I descend Myself.

4.7 To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear millennium after millennium.

4.8 O Arjuna, one who knows in truth My transcendental birth and activities, performed in My incarnate forms, is immediately liberated upon leaving the body. Of this there is no doubt.

4.9 Anyone who knows factually the nature of My transcendence, My eternality, My blissfulness and My omnipotence, engages in My devotional service and surrenders unto Me completely. There is no doubt about this.

4.10 In this very life, there are many liberated souls engaged in My devotional service; and many others are being cleansed of sinful reactions by knowledge of Me. When fully engaged in My devotional service, they achieve the transcendental knowledge of My nature and thus come within My supremacy.

4.11 As all surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of Pritha.

4.12 Those in this world who aspire to the celestial planets generally perform sacrifices, because in the celestial planets, one can enjoy desired pleasures very readily.

4.13 According to the three modes of material nature and the work associated with them, the four divisions of human society are created by Me. And although I created them, you should know that I am yet the non-doer, being unchangeable.

4.14 There is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of action. One who understands this truth about Me also does not become entangled in the fruitive reactions of work.

4.15 All the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding and so attained liberation. Therefore, you should perform your duty as did the great sages of former times.

4.16 Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and what is inaction. Now I shall explain to you what action is, knowing which you shall be liberated from all sins.

4.17 The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore, one should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what inaction is.

4.18 One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent among men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of activities.

4.19 One is understood to be in full knowledge whose every endeavor is devoid of desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker whose fruitive action is burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.

4.20 Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever satisfied and independent, he performs all kinds of religious activities, but is not affected by them.

4.21 Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions, and acts only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not affected by sinful reactions.

4.22 He is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, and he is unaffected by material dualities, free from envy, steady both in success and failure, and unaffected though engaged in all kinds of activities.

4.23 All the reactions of the qualities of matter are experienced through the mind. Therefore, O blessed Arjuna, when you are free from doubts through higher intelligence, then you will become indifferent to all that you hear and all that you have heard.

This is a representative sample of the Bhagavad Gita's teachings on yoga, knowledge, devotion, and the nature of the Supreme Reality.
